---
layout: post
title: Energetic Systems of Art Summation
date: 2023-02-26
---

How are performances put together? A question that could be answered in an
infinite variety of ways, there can’t be a right answer. Is there a right
answer for each individual though? Perhaps. I’m inclined to believe we lean
into our preferences more than anything else, unless practicing a specific
approach we may not have considered on our own. We’ve discussed the influence
of personal tastes in the course already, and whether or not it creates a
signature style. In my experience, I say it does. Unless somebody’s approach
is to always take a different approach and challenge what they know, given
enough time and space to reflect on a collective body of work, a style
emerges. Certain elements even remind us of specific works, hence why we can
compare by saying things like ‘This feels like a Kubrick film.’ There must be
value in analyzing our personal preferences, as then we can be more objective
in our biases, and understand what makes things work for us comprehensively.
That being said, I should try to deconstruct some of my own taste.

In general, I appreciate a piece that is cohesive with a purely chronological
narrative from start to finish, but it’s also nice to have something more
reflective, with moments that time stands still in, and plot taking a back
seat to mood. However, even more satisfying than a work that guides you 100%
of the way, is something more segmented, that unifies itself at some other
point, or in some other way. It could be through characters that cross paths
only briefly going through stories that intersect, akin to Pulp Fiction. Or
perhaps we could be met with a collective theme that unifies an ensemble,
focal points taking turns center stage. I’m struggling to think of good
examples, but maybe plays like Cats are similar, with many characters being
introduced and given time to shine throughout.

When meeting new characters, I like it done without fanfare. Showing us what
someone does will always be more important than telling us who someone is, so
I’d rather have them simply appear and play into the story. For me, it also
creates more engagement, as it’s not spelled out for you. Just like in real
life, we should be met with the questions that face us when we see others’
actions. Why are they doing this? What do they want? Motive should be a
driving force for any character-centric plot, so in my opinion, leaving room
for nuance in the storyline by letting us interpret what’s going on is a more
interesting way to tell a story.

I also believe the sets around performances are a character of their own, and
a main character at that, as they surround the entire production the whole
time. They should be treated with the same level of thought and care as any
other character, of course that doesn’t mean they should be a focal point at
all times, fancy and ornate, nor a minimal blank canvas for performers to act
within. The set should serve to tell the story in the best possible way,
whether it’s giving the story elevated context through intricate backgrounds
that tell a story on their own, or getting out of the way with sparse designs
that pull you into the act itself, and lessen the barrier between set and
audience.

How much barrier between the audience do I want anyways? With the setting of
audiences, I am fairly traditional in my preference. To me, having a well lit
stage/screen and a room full of onlookers in the dark creates a more
captivating atmosphere for performance. You can feel yourself as part of a
collective whole, without necessarily the distraction of being in a normal
room with as many people. If audience participation is called for, having
stage lights in the opposite direction seems the most engaging to me, as the
stark contrast of a searchlight beaming into a crowd feels exciting, and
generates a spectacle on its own as it cuts through audience members and turns
the crowd into a flash of colors and faces. Having something more meta and
tongue-in-cheek, with audiences being acknowledged by characters can be fun
too, but I feel like those types of acts are more suited to comedic
performance. Being a part of the reality a performance engages with can be
exciting, but it comes with the chance of people giving up investment in the
story, depending on the level of disbelief required or expected.

Speaking of reality, where do I draw the line between realism and fantasy?
While fantasy is all fun and games, and serves an important role in escapist
stories that would never be told in our reality, I find being able to relate
to a character that lives in a similar way to ourselves is more engaging since
there’s never necessarily a disconnect between what is happening and what we
know about. That being said, what I prefer is probably somewhere in between,
in the magical realism genre. Something that’s grounded in the mundanity of
our world, only to be met with fantastical elements that can exaggerate
things, without characters being all that fazed. My exposure to the genre is
mostly through Japanese authors like Haruki Murakami and Banana Yoshimoto,
where characters end up in strange liminal spaces or somehow communicate to
the deceased without a fuss. It still has an effect on the characters, but not
because of a ‘Why is this happening?’ but a ‘What does this mean?’ Being given
the ability to throw normal people into less than normal scenarios without
their perception being blown apart is an intriguing concept that almost always
draws me in. A great example of this on screen is also Maniac (Netflix, 2018).
In which, the characters are able to go through fictional scenarios that
affect them in very real ways, and the subconscious itself becomes a prominent
element of the show.

Obviously, the idea of magical realism involves fiction. Of course there’s
nothing wrong with fiction, although I do believe even in fiction, the most
compelling aspects stem from autobiographical experience anyways. Whether
that’s a performer that’s reacting to a scene as if they were reliving a past
experience, or a writer who calls upon their memories to draw a story from,
the most guaranteed way to ensure a story feels human, is to have a genuine
human experience behind it.

Acting comes in many forms, all of them equally valid, but of course what
affects one, may not do much for another. In my opinion the style of acting on
display does not matter, as long as it’s unified in some way. You could have
all the cheese and campiness of an older film throughout an entire piece to a
wonderful degree, keep it down-to-earth and whole-hearted to try and connect
in a more relatable context, or subdue the entire thing to create a sort of
uncanny effect, something that might be unnerving or work to create a reality
that works through a different lens. Also viable is the contrast that can be
used in these approaches within the same work. There has to be a
“straight-man” for there to be a wild card.

> “When it comes to art, most of the world clings to Aristotelian ideas because they promise that there’s logic and sense, and indirectly promises that everything will work out in the end. Even if there’s evidence to the contrary.”

I find the tradition of Aristotle’s ideas to be off-putting when they are
expected without question. For people to be baffled by art that makes them ask
‘What’s the point?’ misses the mark altogether. While universal values make
sense on a conceptual level, in practice it falls apart. Aristotelian ideas
cling on even today due to the human tendency of assigning meaning and logic
to a nature that frankly doesn’t give a damn what we think. Being in the
middle of an unanswerable, unassignable reality is the existential crisis we
all have to face everyday. I feel that resigning to the notion that there is
one inherent truth within any one thing is absurd, albeit a necessity for
some. We can see how fast the notion of universality crumbles when we apply
the same ideology to the root question underlying it all, What is the meaning
of life? Under any external answer, there can be no one-size-fits-all. The
meaning of life is to be alive, whatever that means to you.

__Are we watching it or are we part of it?
It depends on where you are, in time and space...
Art and all the systems it contains reflects our relative truth.__

The separation and/or integration of art and experience remains hard to
clarify, even in the most lucid of explanations. One of the more existential
ideas to clarify this might be the age-old question ‘If a tree falls in a
forest and no one is around to hear it, does it make a sound?’ And while the
answer may be initially clear as an objective Yes, the important takeaway lies
in the fact that subjectively it is No. Without our perception of the art
around us, there is none, at least in our mind, as we cannot know anything to
exist without having observed it. In this way we are intrinsically linked to
any performance itself. A paradigm shift with the power to change our view of
life, what we experience is and always will be an extension of us.

-- E
